Basic networking tooling in linux

> All these configurations, tools and paths are for debian based systems such as ubuntu. These might not work properly for other distributions like RHEL.

## Configuring the NIC

NIC stands for Network Interface Card and is the hardware device used for network communication. Each NIC comes with
a unique identifier called as the MAC address.

NICs can be configured in Linux by editing the files in `/etc/network/interfaces`.

There are two ways we can configure the network configuration of machines, first by using the `net-tools` suite(which is now
deprecated) and the other is the latest `iproute2` suite. The preferrable way of managing the configurations is to
use `iproute2`.

### Setting static IP on an interface

```bash
$ cat /etc/network/interfaces
auto lo
iface lo inet loopback

auto eth0
iface eth0 inet dhcp

# Change the above file with the following contents.
$ cat /etc/network/interfaces

auto lo
iface lo inet loopback

auto  eth0
iface eth0 inet static
address   10.42.189.198
broadcast 10.42.189.207
netmask   255.255.255.0
gateway   10.42.189.193
```

To make this updated configuration work we need to first down the ethernet device and then up it. This should be done using `ifup` and `ifdown`

```bash
$ ifdown eth0
$ ifup eth0
```

**NOTE**: ifup is different from `ifconfig eth0 up` in the way that the later will reactivate the link keeping the exisitng
configuration, whereas ifup will read the correct file that contains the latest updated configuration.

With `iproute2` the above mechanism of updating the state of interface from up to down or vice versa is different.

```bash
$ ip link set down eth0

$ ip link set up eth0
```

### To add/remove ip address for an interface using command line

```bash
$ ip addr add 10.0.0.44/24 dev eth0

# With iproute2 we can add multiple ip address to the same interface
# which is not possible with ifconfig
$ ip addr add 10.0.0.45/24 broadcast 10.0.0.255 dev eth0

$ ip addr del 10.0.0.44/25 dev eth0
```

For IPv6 addresses

```bash
$ ip -6 addr add 2002:0db5:0:f102::1/64 dev eth0
```

As in above command when dealing with IPv6 addresses we need one more argument for the commands which is `-6`. For IPv4
configuration the argument is `-4`, but we don't use it since the default is IPv4.

### Spoofing MAC address of an interface

We can change the percieved MAC address for a particular interface as below.

```bash
$ ip link set dev eth0 address <mac_address>
```

This is a temporary change. Also, before changing the MAC address we need to deactivate the interface first.

## ARP

ARP is the protocol for resolving IP address to MAC addresses, kernel maintains an internal arp table containing recently
identified hosts.

```bash
# Show ARP table
$ arp -a
host(IP) at MAC_ADDRESS [HW type] on interface
test(10.42.0.184) at b4:c4:fc:89:7d:46 [ether] on eth0

# Delete an entry from ARP table
$ arp -d <host>/IP
```


